PackageRevision controller architecture docs (#971)
nephio-project/porch: docs/content/en/docs/5_architecture_and_components/controllers/packagerevision-controller/_index.md

---
title: "PackageRevision Controller"
type: docs
weight: 2
draft: true
description: |
  Kubernetes controller for package revision lifecycle management (v1alpha2).
---

## Overview

> The PackageRevision Controller manages the full lifecycle of package revisions as native Kubernetes CRDs. In the v1alpha1 architecture, the Porch API Server and Engine handle all operations synchronously within the request path. The PR controller takes a different approach — it watches `PackageRevision` CRDs in etcd and reconciles their desired state against Git asynchronously, following standard Kubernetes controller patterns.

Reviewer: i think we should try and separate ourselves from the infamous AI "—" where we can. i know its a valid grammar but in practice noone ever uses often it apart form AI. gives the impression that it wasn't ran by people at the end

Reviewer: just maybe ask it to reword those sentences without usage of that notorious character

Reviewer: its one thing when its just once or twice but its all over the section

Reviewer 2: RIP the glorious em dash, but agreed

> The PackageRevision Controller manages the full lifecycle of package revisions as native Kubernetes CRDs. In the v1alpha1 architecture, the Porch API Server and Engine handle all operations synchronously within the request path. The PR controller takes a different approach — it watches `PackageRevision` CRDs in etcd and reconciles their desired state against Git asynchronously, following standard Kubernetes controller patterns.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The PackageRevision (PR) Controller manages the full lifecycle of package revisions as native Kubernetes CRDs. In the v1alpha1 architecture, the Porch API Server and Engine handle all operations synchronously within the request path. The PR controller takes a different approach — it watches `PackageRevision` CRDs in etcd and reconciles their desired state against Git asynchronously, following standard Kubernetes controller patterns.
```

> The PackageRevision Controller manages the full lifecycle of package revisions as native Kubernetes CRDs. In the v1alpha1 architecture, the Porch API Server and Engine handle all operations synchronously within the request path. The PR controller takes a different approach — it watches `PackageRevision` CRDs in etcd and reconciles their desired state against Git asynchronously, following standard Kubernetes controller patterns.

Reviewer 3: should it be PR controller or PR Controller?

│ PackageRevision CRD │     │ PR Controller                │     │ Shared Cache    │
│ (etcd)              │────>│                              │────>│ (from Repo Ctr) │
│                     │     │ • Source execution           │     │                 │
│ • spec.source       │     │ • Render pipeline            │     │ • Git read/write│
│ • spec.lifecycle    │     │ • Lifecycle transitions      │     │ • Draft mgmt    │
│ • annotations       │     │ • Status updates (SSA)       │     │ • Content cache │
└─────────────────────┘     └──────────────────────────────┘     └─────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        ▼
                            ┌──────────────────────┐
                            │ Function Runner      │
                            │ (gRPC)               │
                            └──────────────────────┘
```

The controller does not manage repository connections or synchronization. That responsibility stays with the Repository Controller, which populates the shared cache. The PR controller reads from and writes to that cache — it never opens a Git connection directly.

## Reconciliation Pipeline

> Each reconcile executes three phases in sequence. If any phase produces an error or requires a requeue, subsequent phases are skipped.

Reviewer: likely my misunderstanding but above we discuss how this new controller is asynchronous then down here we are mentioning doing 3 phases in sequence

> **Source execution** handles one-time package creation. When a user creates a PackageRevision with `spec.source` set (init, clone, copy, or upgrade), the controller executes that source operation to produce the initial package content in Git. Once `status.creationSource` is populated, this phase becomes a no-op on future reconciles.

Reviewer: is it not "in Git" only if its not draft? init by default on DB cache only does work in the cache no?

Reviewer: / this shared cache

> **Rendering** runs the KRM function pipeline defined in the package's Kptfile. Two events trigger rendering: a content push via the PRR handler (signalled by the `porch.kpt.dev/render-request` annotation), or the completion of source execution. The controller reads resources from the cache, invokes kpt render through the function runner, and writes the results back.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Rendering** runs the KRM function pipeline defined in the package's Kptfile. Two events can trigger the rendering: a content push via the PRR handler (signalled by the `porch.kpt.dev/render-request` annotation), or the completion of source execution. The controller reads resources from the cache, invokes kpt render through the function runner, and writes the results back.
```

**Lifecycle transition** compares the desired lifecycle in `spec.lifecycle` with the actual lifecycle in Git. If they differ, the controller transitions the package in Git. On publish, it assigns a revision number and updates the `latest-revision` label across all revisions of the same package.

## Relationship to Other Components

The PR controller sits alongside the Repository Controller in the controllers deployment. It depends on the shared cache that the Repository Controller creates and populates — this is enforced at startup by initializing the repo reconciler first and injecting its cache into the PR reconciler.

> The Porch API Server and Engine continue to serve `PackageRevisionResources` for content access. When a user pushes content through PRR, the API Server writes to Git via the Engine and then patches the render-request annotation on the PackageRevision CRD. This annotation change triggers the PR controller to pick up the new content and render it.

Reviewer: again has this changed? api server writes to git through the engine if its not draft by default right? or has this changed?

> The Porch API Server and Engine continue to serve `PackageRevisionResources` for content access. When a user pushes content through PRR, the API Server writes to Git via the Engine and then patches the render-request annotation on the PackageRevision CRD. This annotation change triggers the PR controller to pick up the new content and render it.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Porch API Server and Engine continue to serve `PackageRevisionResources` (PRR) for content access. When a user pushes content through PRR, the API Server writes to Git via the Engine and then patches the render-request annotation on the PackageRevision CRD. This annotation change triggers the PR controller to pick up the new content and render it.
```

PackageVariant and PackageVariantSet controllers create PackageRevision CRDs as part of their automation. The PR controller reconciles these like any other PackageRevision — it doesn't know or care who created the CRD.

## Enabling the Controller

The PR controller is enabled via the `--reconcilers` flag on the controllers deployment:

```
--reconcilers=packagerevisions
```

> It requires the Repository Controller to be running (for the shared cache), the `PackageRevision` CRD to be installed, and the `FUNCTION_RUNNER_ADDRESS` environment variable to be set if external function evaluation is needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Make sure the Repository Controller is running (for the shared cache), the `PackageRevision` CRD is installed, and the `FUNCTION_RUNNER_ADDRESS` environment variable is set if external function evaluation is needed.
```

## Configuration

The controller exposes flags for tuning concurrency and retry behavior:

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `packagerevisions.max-concurrent-reconciles` | 50 | Maximum parallel reconciles |
| `packagerevisions.max-concurrent-renders` | 20 | Maximum parallel render operations |
| `packagerevisions.render-requeue-delay` | 2s | Delay before requeue when render limit reached |
| `packagerevisions.repo-operation-retry-attempts` | 3 | Retry count for git operations |

> | `packagerevisions.max-grpc-message-size` | 6MB | Max gRPC message size for fn-runner |

Reviewer: this is "Configuration and Deployment" information and should be in its relevant section 6 no? can have a link to it from here though

│ PackageRevision CRD │     │ PR Controller                │     │ Shared Cache    │
│ (etcd)              │────>│                              │────>│ (from Repo Ctr) │
│                     │     │ • Source execution           │     │                 │
│ • spec.source       │     │ • Render pipeline            │     │ • Git read/write│
│ • spec.lifecycle    │     │ • Lifecycle transitions      │     │ • Draft mgmt    │
│ • annotations       │     │ • Status updates (SSA)       │     │ • Content cache │
└─────────────────────┘     └──────────────────────────────┘     └─────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        ▼
                            ┌──────────────────────┐
                            │ Function Runner      │
                            │ (gRPC)               │
                            └──────────────────────┘
```

The controller does not manage repository connections or synchronization. That responsibility stays with the Repository Controller, which populates the shared cache. The PR Controller reads from and writes to that cache; it never opens a Git connection directly.

## Reconciliation Pipeline

> Each reconcile executes three phases in sequence. The reconcile itself is triggered asynchronously (decoupled from the API request), but within a single reconcile run the phases are ordered. If any phase produces an error or requires a requeue, subsequent phases are skipped.

Author: Done

## Relationship to Other Components

The PR Controller sits alongside the Repository Controller in the controllers deployment. It depends on the shared cache that the Repository Controller creates and populates. This is enforced at startup by initializing the repo reconciler first and injecting its cache into the PR reconciler.

The Porch API Server and Engine continue to serve `PackageRevisionResources` (PRR) for content access. When a user pushes content through PRR, the API Server writes to the shared cache via the Engine and then patches the render-request annotation on the PackageRevision CRD. This annotation change triggers the PR Controller to pick up the new content and render it.

PackageVariant and PackageVariantSet controllers create PackageRevision CRDs as part of their automation. The PR Controller reconciles these like any other PackageRevision; it does not know or care who created the CRD.

## Enabling the Controller

The PR Controller is enabled via the `--reconcilers` flag on the controllers deployment:

```

> --reconcilers=packagerevisions

Author: Done

```

Make sure the Repository Controller is running (for the shared cache), the `PackageRevision` CRD is installed, and the `FUNCTION_RUNNER_ADDRESS` environment variable is set if external function evaluation is needed.

**Repository Annotation**: For the PR Controller to reconcile packages in a repository, the repository must be annotated with `porch.kpt.dev/v1alpha2-migration: "true"`. Without this annotation, the Repository Controller does not create v1alpha2 PackageRevision CRDs. See the [Working with CRD-Based PackageRevisions tutorial]({{% relref "/docs/4_tutorials_and_how-tos/working_with_crd_based_packagerevisions" %}}) for setup instructions.

> For detailed configuration options (concurrency tuning, retry behaviour, gRPC limits), see the [Porch Controllers configuration]({{%/* relref "../../6_configuration_and_deployments/configurations/components/porch-controllers-config" */%}}).

Author: Done

│ • spec.lifecycle    │     │ • Lifecycle transitions      │     │ • Draft mgmt    │
│ • annotations       │     │ • Status updates (SSA)       │     │ • Content cache │
└─────────────────────┘     └──────────────────────────────┘     └─────────────────┘
                                        │
                                        ▼
                            ┌──────────────────────┐
                            │ Function Runner      │
                            │ (gRPC)               │
                            └──────────────────────┘
```

The controller does not manage repository connections or synchronization. That responsibility stays with the Repository Controller, which populates the shared cache. The PR Controller reads from and writes to that cache; it never opens a Git connection directly.

## Reconciliation Pipeline

Each reconcile executes four phases in sequence. The reconcile itself is triggered asynchronously (decoupled from the API request), but within a single reconcile run the phases are ordered. If any phase produces an error or requires a requeue, subsequent phases are skipped.

> **Finalizer and owner reference management** ensures proper deletion gating. Published packages are protected by a finalizer to prevent accidental deletion. Owners hips to the Repository CRD enable Kubernetes garbage collection to cascade deletion of packages when repositories are deleted.

Reviewer: "Owners hips to the Repository" owner hips? what does this mean? maybe just typo?

Author: Fixed
